# The adaptive radiation of New Zealand’s skinks and geckos has resulted in distinct viromes

Repository containing the R-code used to analyse virome composition and the alignments that were generated in "The adaptive radiation of New Zealand’s skinks and geckos has resulted in distinct viromes"

Stephanie J. Waller, Richelle Butcher, Lauren Lim, Kate McInnes, Edward C. Holmes, Jemma L. Geoghegan

**Abstract**

New Zealand is home to over 120 native endemic species of skinks and geckos that have evolved through adaptive radiation over the last 24 million years, likely driven by the exploitation of diverse habitats formed during the Miocene. The recent adaptive radiation of animal hosts may facilitate viral host-switching, likely reflecting their close genetic relationships and therefore relatively low barriers for cross-species virus transmission. Conversely, as animal hosts have adapted to new niches, so too could their viruses, such that animals that niche-specialised following adaptive radiations may be expected to harbour distinct viruses. Through a metatranscriptomic analysis of eight of New Zealand’s native skink and gecko species, as well as the only introduced species, the rainbow skink (Lampropholis delicata), we aimed to reveal the diversity of viruses in these hosts and determine whether and how the adaptive radiation of skinks and geckos in New Zealand has impacted virus diversity and evolution. We identified a total of 15 novel reptilian viruses spanning 11 different viral families, across seven of the nine species sampled. Notably, we detected no viral host-switching among the native hosts sampled suggesting that host speciation has likely resulted in isolated, niche-constrained viral populations that has prevented cross-species transmission, at least among the hosts sampled. Using a protein structural similarity-based approach, we further identified a highly divergent bunya-like virus that potentially formed a new family within the Bunyavirales. This study has broadened our understanding of reptilian viruses within New Zealand and illustrates how host adaptive radiation may limit viral-host interactions.
